1. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Oct 4;108(40):16777-82. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1109384108. Epub 2011 Sep 19.

A virus capsid component mediates virion retention and transmission by its 
insect vector.

Chen AY(1), Walker GP, Carter D, Ng JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology and Center for Disease Vector 
Research, University of California, Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

Numerous pathogens of humans, animals, and plants are transmitted by specific 
arthropod vectors. However, understanding the mechanisms governing these 
pathogen-vector interactions is hampered, in part, by the lack of easy-to-use 
analytical tools. We investigated whitefly transmission of Lettuce infectious 
yellows virus (LIYV) by using a unique immunofluorescent localization approach 
in which we fed virions or recombinant virus capsid components to whiteflies, 
followed by feeding them antibodies to the virions or capsid components, 
respectively. Fluorescent signals, indicating the retention of virions, were 
localized in the anterior foregut or cibarium of a whitefly vector biotype but 
not within those of a whitefly nonvector biotype. Retention of virions in these 
locations strongly corresponded with the whitefly vector transmission of LIYV. 
When four recombinant LIYV capsid components were individually fed to whitefly 
vectors, significantly more whiteflies retained the recombinant minor coat 
protein (CPm). As demonstrated previously and in the present study, whitefly 
vectors failed to transmit virions preincubated with anti-CPm antibodies but 
transmitted virions preincubated with antibodies recognizing the major coat 
protein (CP). Correspondingly, the number of insects that specifically retained 
virions preincubated with anti-CPm antibodies were significantly reduced 
compared with those that specifically retained virions preincubated with anti-CP 
antibodies. Notably, a transmission-defective CPm mutant was deficient in 
specific virion retention, whereas the CPm-restored virus showed WT levels of 
specific virion retention and transmission. These data provide strong evidence 
that transmission of LIYV is determined by a CPm-mediated virion retention 
mechanism in the anterior foregut or cibarium of whitefly vectors.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1109384108
PMCID: PMC3189079
PMID: 21930903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.