1. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2016 Oct 14;82(21):6294-6302. doi:
10.1128/AEM.01914-16.  Print 2016 Nov 1.

Minor Coat and Heat Shock Proteins Are Involved in the Binding of Citrus 
Tristeza Virus to the Foregut of Its Aphid Vector, Toxoptera citricida.

Killiny N(1), Harper SJ(2), Alfaress S(2), El Mohtar C(2), Dawson WO(2).

Author information:
(1)Plant Pathology Department, CREC-IFAS, University of Florida, Lake Alfred, 
Florida, USA nabilkilliny@ufl.edu.
(2)Plant Pathology Department, CREC-IFAS, University of Florida, Lake Alfred, 
Florida, USA.

Vector transmission is a critical stage in the viral life cycle, yet for most 
plant viruses how they interact with their vector is unknown or is explained by 
analogy with previously described relatives. Here we examined the mechanism 
underlying the transmission of citrus tristeza virus (CTV) by its aphid vector, 
Toxoptera citricida, with the objective of identifying what virus-encoded 
proteins it uses to interact with the vector. Using fluorescently labeled 
virions, we demonstrated that CTV binds specifically to the lining of the 
cibarium of the aphid. Through in vitro competitive binding assays between 
fluorescent virions and free viral proteins, we determined that the minor coat 
protein is involved in vector interaction. We also found that the presence of 
two heat shock-like proteins, p61 and p65, reduces virion binding in vitro 
Additionally, treating the dissected mouthparts with proteases did not affect 
the binding of CTV virions. In contrast, chitinase treatment reduced CTV binding 
to the foregut. Finally, competition with glucose, N-acetyl-β-d-glucosamine, 
chitobiose, and chitotriose reduced the binding. These findings together suggest 
that CTV binds to the sugar moieties of the cuticular surface of the aphid 
cibarium, and the binding involves the concerted activity of three virus-encoded 
proteins.
IMPORTANCE: Limited information is known about the specific interactions between 
citrus tristeza virus and its aphid vectors. These interactions are important 
for the process of successful transmission. In this study, we localized the CTV 
retention site as the cibarium of the aphid foregut. Moreover, we demonstrated 
that the nature of these interactions is protein-carbohydrate binding. The viral 
proteins, including the minor coat protein and two heat shock proteins, bind to 
sugar moieties on the surface of the foregut. These findings will help in 
understanding the transmission mechanism of CTV by the aphid vector and may help 
in developing control strategies which interfere with the CTV binding to its 
insect vector to block the transmission.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01914-16
PMCID: PMC5066346
PMID: 27520823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]